---
layout: post
title: Reflections on Janny Wurts
date: 2026-02-20 15:43
description: In which I open the secret blog project with reflections on *The Wars of Light and Shadow*
tags: fantasy economics
categories: fantasy-economics
featured: true
---

This is the first of (potentially several) blog posts, in which I reflect on things that strike my fancy. One goal in particular will be to connect two passions of mine, economics and fantasy literature. In this first post, I reflect on Janny Wurts' <strong>The Wars of Light and Shadow</strong> (WoLaS from now on). I recently finished the final book, <i>Song of the Mysteries</i>, after restarting reading the series somewhere last year.

<strong> Spoilers from now on, be warned! </strong

## Summary

tWoLaS is an 11-book cycle mainly taking place on the planet of Athera, with main continent Paravia. This is a planet that (we learn throughout the books) has not originally been inhabited by humans; instead, it was first populated by dragons and later also by three special races called Paravians: unicorns, centaurs, and sunchildren. The Paravians are the centerpiece of this world's history, for they were sent directly by Ath (God, if you will) to bring grace to the world. You see, these dragons had the nasty habit of running amok with their creative magic, which led to countless horrors and destructions, foremost among them several genocidal nightmare races destroying every living thing.

An interesting feature of the setting is that, while it on first glance looks medieval, it is in fact a sci-fi setting. The prime human movers, the seven super-powerful sorcerers known as the Fellowship of the Seven, arrive on Athera over 10,000 years before the books start. Their arrival is caused by the dragons, who magically pull their spaceship on collision course, and subsequently transform these humans into immortal creatures with mind-boggling power.